OSDOCS-14169:CUDN localnet (#93001)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-cudn-localnet.adoc

//module included in the following assembly:
//
// * networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-cudn-localnet_{context}"]
= Creating a ClusterUserDefinedNetwork CR for Localnet

> A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. Connecting to additional services outside the cluster requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

Reviewer: Really good point. You're right. Localnet requires - and depends on - proper configuration of the physical network for **everything**.

> A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. Connecting to additional services outside the cluster requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

Author: So `Proper configuration of the physical network, enables both east-west...`

> A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. Connecting to additional services outside the cluster requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

Reviewer: well, I am more confused now :sweat_smile: 

I think you should just say something like:
```suggestion
A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. This topology type requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.
```

> A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. Connecting to additional services outside the cluster requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

Author: @asood-rh what do you think? That change works for me.

> A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. Connecting to additional services outside the cluster requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me @JoeAldinger

.Prerequisites

* You have logged in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.

> * You have created and configured the Open vSwitch (OVS) bridge mapping to associate the logical OVN-Kubernetes network with the physical node network through the OVS bridge. For more information, see "Configuration for a localnet switched topology".

Author: I'm double checking with team members, but I think the best I can do is the directional language and the link in the `Additional resources`.

> * You have created and configured the Open vSwitch (OVS) bridge mapping to associate the logical OVN-Kubernetes network with the physical node network through the OVS bridge. For more information, see "Configuration for a localnet switched topology".

Reviewer 2: @JoeAldinger Could we include another prerequisite i.e.
CUDN has been configured in primary role.

If there is not one then there will undesired results creating pods with secondary network.

Reviewer: I don't follow - it should be possible to have a secondary attachment to a localnet C-UDN even if the workload is attached to the cluster default network.

@asood-rh

.Procedure

. Create a request for `Localnet` topology type cluster-wide user-defined network:

.. Create a YAML file, such as `cluster-udn-localnet.yaml`, to define your request for a `localnet` topology as in the following example:
+
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1
kind: ClusterUserDefinedNetwork
metadata:
  name: <cudn_name> # <1>
spec:
  namespaceSelector: # <2>
    matchLabels: # <3>
      "<label_1_key>": "<label_1_value>" # <4>
      "<label_2_key>": "<label_2_value>" # <4>
  network: # <5>
    topology: Localnet # <6>
    localnet: # <7>
      role: Secondary # <8>
      physicalNetworkName: test
      ipam: {lifecycle: Persistent}
      subnets: ["192.168.0.0/16", "2001:dbb::/64"] # <9>
----
<1> Name of your `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` CR.

> <2> A label query over the set of namespaces that the cluster UDN CR applies to. Uses the standard Kubernetes `MatchLabel` selector. Must not point to `default`, `openshift-*`, or any other system namespaces.

Reviewer 3: Dummy grammar question: Is the `,` correct before "or"?

Author: Yes, we adhere to the oxford comma in our IBM style guide.

<3> Uses the `matchLabels` selector type, where terms are evaluated with an `AND` relationship.

> <4> Because the `matchLabels` selector type is used, provisions namespaces that contain both `<label_1_key>=<label_1_value>` and `<label_2_key>=<label_2_value>` labels.

Reviewer 3: The sentence "provisions namespaces that contain both (...)" doesn't make much sense. It shuold say something like "CUDN is provisioned on namespaces that contain both (...)" or "CUDN is deployed to namespaces that contain both (...)"

<5> Describes the network configuration.

> <6> The `topology` field describes the network configuration. Specifying a `Localnet` topology type creates one logical switch that is directly bridged to one provider network.

Reviewer 3: We are already in the section for the `Localnet` topology, so not sure if this full explanation makes sense or we should just state that this sets the topology to `Localnet` (which is what this section is all about).

<9> For `Localnet` topology types the following specifies config details for the `subnet` field:
+
* The subnets field is optional.
* The subnets field is of type `string` and accepts standard CIDR formats for both IPv4 and IPv6.
* The subnets field accepts one or two items. For two items, they must be of a different family. For example, subnets values of `10.100.0.0/16` and `2001:db8::/64`.
* `Localnet` subnets can be omitted. If omitted, users must configure static IP addresses for the pods. As a consequence, port security only prevents MAC spoofing. For more information, see "Configuring pods with a static IP address".

. Apply your request by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create --validate=true -f <example_cluster_udn>.yaml
----
where:
`<example_cluster_udn>.yaml`:: Is the name of your `Localnet` configuration file.

. Verify that your request is successful by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get clusteruserdefinednetwork <cudn_name> -o yaml
----
where:
`<cudn_name>`:: Is the name you created of your cluster-wide user-defined network.

.Example output
[%collapsible]
====
[source,yaml]
----

> apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1

Reviewer 2: @JoeAldinger As there are no section explaining the YAML. Please replace the YAML with about YAML as it real output.

> apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1

Author: done

//module included in the following assembly:
//
// * networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-cudn-localnet_{context}"]
= Creating a ClusterUserDefinedNetwork CR for a Localnet topology

A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster. This topology type requires the additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

.Prerequisites

* You are logged in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.

* You created and configured the Open vSwitch (OVS) bridge mapping to associate the logical OVN-Kubernetes network with the physical node network through the OVS bridge. For more information, see "Configuration for a localnet switched topology".

> * You created a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` custom resource (CR) in a `Primary` role.

Reviewer 3: (I am refering to line 17, not sure why github is highligting the other lines)

> * You created a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` custom resource (CR) in a `Primary` role.

Reviewer: good catch ! this is wrong - localnet should only be available on secondary networks - it should throw an error when configured as a primary network.

> * You created a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` custom resource (CR) in a `Primary` role.

Reviewer: Got it. You're right. I confirm you can have a secondary localnet attachment even if the workload is attached to the cluster default network.

> * You created a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` custom resource (CR) in a `Primary` role.

Reviewer 3: Then I guess we should remove this point as prerrequisite. Then, if @asood-rh can confirm his findings, it might led to opening a bug report.

> * You created a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` custom resource (CR) in a `Primary` role.

Author: For the time being I'm removing this.

.Procedure

> . Create a request for `Localnet` topology type cluster-wide user-defined network:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
. Create a cluster-wide user-defined network for a `Localnet` topology.
```

Author: This gets a bit in the weeds. We say `Create a request` because you aren't actually creating a CUDN. You are creating an API that is requesting that another (NAD) be created. It was the easiest way to word this I think. We got it from u/s docs somewhere.

Reviewer: I like @palonsoro 's suggestion.

It does sound simpler / more straight-forward when reading.

Author: Done

> .. Create a YAML file, such as `cluster-udn-localnet.yaml`, to define your request for a `localnet` topology as in the following example:

Author: This is also a bit in the weeds. The short answer is it is both. `Localnet` refers to the `topology` field while `localnet` refers to the `localnet` parameter. Here I think we do need `Localnet`

+
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1
kind: ClusterUserDefinedNetwork
metadata:
  name: <cudn_name> # <1>
spec:
  namespaceSelector: # <2>
    matchLabels: # <3>
      "<label_1_key>": "<label_1_value>" # <4>
      "<label_2_key>": "<label_2_value>" # <4>
  network: # <5>
    topology: Localnet # <6>
    localnet: # <7>
      role: Secondary # <8>
      physicalNetworkName: test
      ipam: {lifecycle: Persistent}
      subnets: ["192.168.0.0/16", "2001:dbb::/64"] # <9>
----

> <1> Name of your `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` CR.

Author: Fine how it is.

<2> A label query over the set of namespaces that the cluster UDN CR applies to. Uses the standard Kubernetes `MatchLabel` selector. Must not point to `default`, `openshift-*`, or any other system namespaces.

> <3> Uses the `matchLabels` selector type, where terms are evaluated with an `AND` relationship.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<3> Uses the `matchLabels` selector type, where terms are evaluated with an `AND` relationship. When you define labels under `matchLabels`, all label conditions must match for the CUDN CR to be applied.
```

Author: This seems implied in the term `matchLabels`.

<4> Because the `matchLabels` selector type is used, the CUDN CR is deployed to namespaces that contain both `<label_1_key>=<label_1_value>` and `<label_2_key>=<label_2_value>` labels.
<5> Describes the network configuration.

> <6> Specifying a `Localnet` topology type creates one logical switch that is directly bridged to one provider network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<6> Set this field to `Localnet` to create a logical switch that bridges directly to your physical provider network. 
```

<7> This field specifies the `localnet` topology.

> <8> Specifies the `role` for the network configuration. `Secondary` is the only `role` specification supported for the `localnet` topology.

Author: Changes the support statement which is necessary.

<9> For `Localnet` topology types the following specifies config details for the `subnet` field:
+

> * The subnets field is optional.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```
Remove this point as we have described this field as optional.

Author: I don't think I follow

> * The subnets field is of type `string` and accepts standard CIDR formats for both IPv4 and IPv6.

Author: Doesn't conform to style guidelines

* The subnets field accepts one or two items. For two items, they must be of a different family. For example, subnets values of `10.100.0.0/16` and `2001:db8::/64`.

> * `Localnet` subnets can be omitted. If omitted, users must configure static IP addresses for the pods. As a consequence, port security only prevents MAC spoofing. For more information, see "Configuring pods with a static IP address".

Author: There is actually an optional field `excludeSubnets` that I think could get confusing if I use exclude here.

//module included in the following assembly:
//
// * networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-cudn-localnet_{context}"]
= Creating a ClusterUserDefinedNetwork CR for Localnet

> A `Localnet` topology connects the secondary network to the physical underlay. This enables both east-west cluster traffic and access to services running outside the cluster, but it requires additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

Reviewer 5: nit: 
> but it requires additional configuration of the underlying Open vSwitch (OVS) system on cluster nodes.

I would ommit "but", it may sounds like a down side for using this feature.

Can we have a a link for configuring the OVN bridge mapping? (i.e. the underlaying OVS on cluster nodes)

Reviewer 3: Agreed. I'd write it more like "note that it requires additional configuration"

.Prerequisites

* You have logged in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.

> * You have created and configured the Open vSwitch (OVS) bridge mapping to associate the physical network with the interface label created by OVS. For more information, see "Configuration for a localnet switched topology".

Reviewer: I find this more confusing than it needs to - especially the "interface label" part. 

What do we even mean w/ that ? The purpose of the bridge mappings is to associate the logical network (OVN) with a physical Kubernetes node interface via an OVS bridge (to which said interface is connected to).

Author: I rewrote this to try to clarify.

.Procedure

. Create a request for `Localnet` topology type cluster-wide user-defined network:

> .. Create a YAML file, such as `cluster-udn-localnet.yaml`, to define your request for a `Layer2` topology as in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Create a YAML file, such as `cluster-udn-localnet.yaml`, to define your request for a `Localnet` topology as in the following example:
```

+
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1
kind: ClusterUserDefinedNetwork
metadata:
  name: <cudn_name> # <1>
spec:
  namespaceSelector: # <2>
    matchLabels: # <3>
      "<label_1_key>": "<label_1_value>" # <4>
      "<label_2_key>": "<label_2_value>" # <4>
  network: # <5>
    topology: Localnet # <6>
    localnet: # <7>
      role: Secondary # <8>
      physicalNetworkName: test
      ipam: {lifecycle: Persistent}
      subnets: ["192.168.0.0/16", "2001:dbb::/64"] # <9>
----
<1> Name of your `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` CR.

> <2> A label query over the set of namespaces that the cluster UDN CR applies to. Uses the standard Kubernetes `MatchLabel` selector. Must not point to `default` or `openshift-*` namespaces.

Reviewer 3: I'd say it must not point to `default`, `openshift-*` or any other system namespaces. Reason: there are some namespaces, like `kube-system` or `metallb` that don't match this pattern and also mustn't be touched by this, yet I don't think it is worth it to maintain an exhaustive list of all of them.

<3> Uses the `matchLabels` selector type, where terms are evaluated with an `AND` relationship.
<4> Because the `matchLabels` selector type is used, provisions namespaces matching both `<example_namespace_one>` _and_ `<example_namespace_two>`.
<5> Describes the network configuration.

> <6> The `topology` field describes the network configuration; accepted values are `Layer2`, `Layer3`, and `Localnet`. Specifying a `Localnet` topology type creates one logical switch that is shared by all nodes.

Reviewer: aren't we providing documentation for the localnet related use-cases ? Shouldn't we say we need to use `Localnet` here ?

Author: Agree

> <6> The `topology` field describes the network configuration. Specifying a `Localnet` topology type creates one logical switch that is shared by all nodes.

Reviewer 3: > Specifying a `Localnet` topology type creates one logical switch that is shared by all nodes.

This sentence is not correct, or at least not fully complete. For example, the `layer2` topology also creates a logical switch that is "shared by all the nodes" (although each node actually implements it a bit differently because we are using OVNK in interconnect mode).

What makes `localnet` topology special is that we bridge that logical switch to a provider/underlay network (via a `localnet` logical switch port).

So in order to not trap our fingers, I'd say that we can replace the sentence with something like: "Specifying a `Localnet` topology type creates one logical switch that is directly bridged to one provider network" 

(not sure if we prefer to name those network as "underlay networks" or "provider networks" in terms of terminology consistency, both mean the same but we should be consistent)

Author: Looking at the repo it seems like `provider network` is used more often so I will use that for consistency.

> <7> This field specifies the topology configuration. It must be `localnet`.

Reviewer 3: I'd rather say: "This field specifies the configuration details of the `localnet` topology". That way, we also imply that this field is present because we chose `topology: localnet` in the previous field (yet we can also make it explicit, if you see it better)

> <7> This field specifies the topology configuration. It can be `layer2` or `layer3`.

Reviewer: this one is wrong. We're providing the localnet configuration.

> <8> Specifies `Primary` or `Secondary`. `Primary` is the only `role` specification supported in {product-version}.

Reviewer: this is also wrong - we don't support `Primary` localnet UDNs. Or even have it in our roadmap .

Author: copy and paste mistakes that didn't get caught, apologies.

> <9> For `Layer2` topology types the following specifies config details for the `subnet` field:

Reviewer: I think we want to refer `Localnet` instead of `Layer2`.

+
* The subnets field is optional.
* The subnets field is of type `string` and accepts standard CIDR formats for both IPv4 and IPv6.
* The subnets field accepts one or two items. For two items, they must be of a different family. For example, subnets values of `10.100.0.0/16` and `2001:db8::/64`.

> * `Layer2` subnets can be omitted. If omitted, users must configure static IP addresses for the pods. As a consequence, port security only prevents MAC spoofing. For more information, see "Configuring pods with a static IP address".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Localnet` subnets can be omitted. If omitted, users must configure static IP addresses for the pods. As a consequence, port security only prevents MAC spoofing. For more information, see "Configuring pods with a static IP address".
```

> * `Localnet` subnets can be omitted. If omitted, users must configure static IP addresses for the pods. As a consequence, port security only prevents MAC spoofing. For more information, see "Configuring pods with a static IP address".

Reviewer 5: Where can I see the example for static IP address?

Reviewer 3: Hmm, I'd also say that it should be acceptable to have an external DHCP server, such that we don't specify the subnets but we can still have the pods use DHCP and they get the IPs from the external DHCP server. However, not sure if somebody from eng can confirm that my understanding is correct.

Reviewer: Yes, @palonsoro is correct, you can have a DHCP server on your network (either in the physical network, or just a pod implementing the DHCP server in the logical network) to advertise IPs for the network's workloads. 

However, this also adds requirements to the workloads: it needs to listen to the DHCP offers. I don't think a "regular" pod does this.

Author: These are all good points. I _think_ the place to provide the examples and further details that you all are discussing though is in the virtualization docs not the core-networking docs. I'll see what the cnv and virt team have planned for `localnet` in 4.19.

Reviewer: I'm borderline **sure** that's described in the virt docs. 

Still, let's ask @sjhala-ccs :)

Reviewer 6: @maiqueb @JoeAldinger I will start work on the localnet story ([CNV-52855](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-52855)) soon. Here's what we currently have in the virt docs on OVN-K localnet: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/virtualization/networking#virt-creating-localnet-nad-cli_virt-connecting-vm-to-ovn-secondary-network

Reviewer: So there's this [well placed note](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/virtualization/networking#virt-creating-localnet-nad-cli_virt-connecting-vm-to-ovn-secondary-network) in the virt docs for **layer2** topologies:
> The above example configures a cluster-wide overlay without a subnet defined. This means that the logical switch implementing the network only provides layer 2 communication. You must configure an IP address when you create the virtual machine by either setting a static IP address or by deploying a DHCP server on the network for a dynamic IP address. 

I think we should carry over that note to the localnet docs - it also applies there.

Reviewer 3: Makes sens to me

Author: @maiqueb you mean in the virt docs, right? Given that the note itself references OCP virt, a use case that would be for virt/vms, and the KCS is a virt use case as well. If so, I'm going to resolve this conversation and leave my colleague in virt to pick the note up in their `localnet` CUDN docs @sjhala-ccs
